[Applause]
hey Mark how you doing
oh well good enough you're having a
great time here at SAS sir
I am you know maybe mark we could begin
maybe just tell us a little bit about
yourself and about smartsheet yeah well
I've had two tours in software if you
will I got into the business in 1995
with a company called onyx software and
I did that for about 10 years a
client-server product yeah that was in
the crm space and then progressed and
joined the young smart G team when it
was pre product free revenue and how
long ago was that that was a January
2006 Wow fantastic overnight successful
yeah it was it was immediately obvious
mark that it was going to be as
successful as it's been yeah I think for
years in my my wife asked that question
she goes weren't we supposed to be known
as you weren't you supposed to be
further along this time you never heard
that from your investors though never
know so it tell us a little bit about
smartsheet what you're doing what you
know what the product does and you know
who uses it and the kinds of
applications that they're using
smartsheet for yeah the genesis for the
service was to really enable a diverse
set of people to better collect
information track it report out on it
more recently automated and the
workloads that we're really going for
were those really the information
tracking that was traditionally done in
spreadsheets right and what we had
observed over many years was that that
population whether it's 700 million 800
million or a billion people it's a large
population so we build a SAS service -
to go after them yeah so you've had
quite a year IPO was it April of last
year it was April of last year your
market timing was fantastic that was
certainly a very yo strong time in terms
of software stocks and as we all know
you can't go IPO without exceptional
growth
but how do you think about growth and
you've been through many phases of the
company and as we were talking backstage
you talked about some of the varied
initiatives that you use to drive growth
on the coupling but I think it'd be
great for the audience to to hear your
perspective about growth is all growth
created equal how do you think about the
choices you have to make about pursuing
various growth initiatives well I think
the first thing that triggers for me tom
is I remember when we got our first big
deal okay and at the table was your
first that first big deal was about five
thousand bucks a year and we were very
excited that it was big oh it was big it
was super big and I think one of the
things that's changed for me over the
years has been really focusing on
something passed beyond the wind yeah
because the wind while it's wonderful as
a software come as a SAS company it's
really what do you do with that customer
once you have one them how do you serve
them how do you how do they derive value
from what you deliver to them and then
how hopefully do they grow with you
because I think one of the one of the
metrics that I'm most proud of is that
ever elusive net dollar retention rate
and if you can land with your customer
and assign more value with them over
time that is really a standout metric in
terms of how you're graded so my view on
revenue has changed from celebrating
being over weighted on the celebration
of the win and now really celebrating
expansion as much as we do the win yeah
and and I think the your business model
is probably one of the strongest in
terms of you know net retention rates
the ability to sell back into your
installed base and just as an aside so I
think you know if mark as you know we
followed you into the IPO market we were
about a month and a half behind you and
every investor when we were doing our
testing the water meetings and then our
you know very Roadshow meeting meetings
every investor would talk about the
smartsheet net
tension rates and and so it's it's one
of the real strengths of the company is
that something that you designed from
the beginning or did that evolve over
time I'd love to say that it was a
brilliant strategy right out of the gate
Tom it is it's something that we we
observed that some of our larger
customers where again back to that be
really excited about the $5,000 win when
you see the growth start to occur and in
a lot of these products which cater to a
large population of people or at least
it could be relevant to a large
population of people it's it's really
understanding how you get in the way or
put yourself in the way of being
discovered yeah and and something that I
think I under appreciated early now how
you position yourself for that growth is
important and we got so much criticism
early for this notion of what we call a
free collaborator so a free collaborator
is if someone subscribes to our service
they can enroll another person for free
now the early investors thought we were
absolutely nuts right why would you give
away all this value well when you point
to some of our largest customers now a
lot of that growth has come in from has
come from being discovered by someone
who wasn't asked to pay who then ends up
being a customer yeah yeah and and I do
think the you know because when we look
at you know when we look at you know SAS
companies we all know the customer our
cost of customer acquisition is a really
significant you know part of our
business model it's expensive and so for
companies that do have the ability to
get viral adoption in organizations I
think it's a very powerful business
model it doesn't work for all products
as we know but when you can it's really
powerful because it also builds in it
built in I think in the company's
culture you know the right kinds of
behaviors you know because your people
are incented to do the right thing for
the customer and that helps us be
successful with that viral adoption it
does and as you achieve scale and you
look at the bookings that you need to
generate in a given year
it is really hard
to backfill for lost ARR it is to
achieve growth at scale you'll see that
that grouse bookings never become ever
large larger and so the ability that way
you can retain that that customer and if
they can contribute to that growth it'll
make the your need to expand your sales
force it'll reduce a little bit of
pressure from that yeah that's great now
let's let's move and let's talk a little
bit about competition so now mark when
most people are starting companies they
try to maybe have a space that you know
they're the first company in the space
and we're kind of blazing that trail and
then some companies you know try to
choose competitors that maybe you know
are maybe not as large maybe not as
well-funded
your largest competitors are Microsoft
and Google yeah so we tried to pick a
really small one stuff so how did that
work out when you were going around
pitching venture investors did did they
get it and was it an intuitive
conclusion they should invest in smart
you know I think the most hurtful comet
I heard was I don't think you'll ever
generate a dollar of revenue to which I
said I think that was supposed to be a
thought bubble you're like you generated
hundreds of billions of dollars of rest
so I think what we what we found we had
we had a very long road in a sense that
we had a very evidence-based approach to
raising capital and in a couple cases we
had to make my one of my mid investors
sort of in 2013/14 I remember leaving
the meeting and looking back at him and
saying not in a smart aleck way but like
hey Tom is 30,000 customers enough to
demonstrate that there's a need and and
he acknowledged he ended up becoming a
great investor and a great supporter but
it's it's one where people there people
will be so ready to tell you that you
don't have a market or that it's not
differentiated and what I see within SAS
is that you have a lot of opportunity to
differentiate with your end buyer and
that end buyer is going to determine
whether there's a market or not it's not
based on an executive or CIO in all
cases
and if you can resonate with that end
point yeah you may have a market
opportunity and what and is that what
you saw that maybe wasn't intuitively
obvious at least initially for investors
were was was that your insight or how
did the company come to the belief that
there was an opportunity here despite
you know the competitive landscape well
one of the things that we found helpful
was to reference analogues that were
highly effective in this motion yeah so
the company that that I observed in the
late 90s and early 2000s was Salesforce
yeah and you know they're there now it's
the obvious company to mention back then
it wasn't the obvious company dimension
but what we saw was a resonance with
that business unit who adopted
Salesforce quickly unbeknownst to other
people in the company yeah so that was
something we wanted to emulate now if
you can pattern match against a megalith
like Salesforce and say hey this dynamic
is actually proven it's been around for
20 years then you're not so much of an
outlier right now was was that to dev
inform the way you designed a sales
strategy so maybe there's a broader
question - about different distribution
challenge channels because I know you
evolved some of that you know over the
years so maybe you know for the audience
describe a little bit about where you
started some of the experiments you had
kind of what works maybe a little bit
about what didn't work and how you team
responded to that yeah I think early we
were quite idealistic we had seen many
of our customers at a prior company have
this need or we felt they had this need
and are in our ambition was to resonate
with them and have each of them
subscribe to smartsheet and pay us a few
hundred bucks a year yeah and we were
gonna do that millions of times Tom so
it's gonna be a really really big
business and what we realized was that
some people did but not enough of them
did yeah so we actually had to move from
our off of our idealistic starting point
and recognize that distribution wasn't
just going to be build a great product
Aang the sign on the door and hope they
start signing up so the the real the
catalyst for us where I really became a
big believer in what others can do for
you
was the Google Apps Marketplace early
and it was our first dose of holy smokes
there's something out there which is not
damn smartsheet that can help us sell
yeah and if you were to say mark was
that an intentional strategy or were you
a little bit lucky well we didn't decide
when they created that ecosystem that
mark plays they did but we happened to
be there at the right time we are one of
those first 50 companies to launch with
them so within two months almost 25% of
the company's gross bookings
smartsheet's gross bookings came from
that marketplace with a zero percent
revenues years two months Wow now that's
either a huge amount of revenue or the
company didn't have any revenue the
story a little bit about maybe so but it
was still material and I think one of
the lessons learned there was we we had
tasted success with this Google through
the marketplace goddess customers in
over 20 countries almost overnight Wow
because they had such a global footprint
now the lesson in the lesson learned
from having that one great success with
Google was how excited at time do you
think we were when the second partner
opportunity came haul it all in baby all
in it's got to work how'd that work out
not as well not as well and I think we
developed an appreciation for really
understanding what some of those
low-level mechanisms are that made the
Google marketplace work as opposed to
saying partnering big distribution
access to existing clients yeah those
are like the hero met those are the hero
attributes some of the lower lower level
things in terms of how is that ecosystem
actually going to introduce your brand
right is it truly going to support you
or is it to appease their shareholders
as they talk about their ecosystem right
so some of those are the lower level
things that we've acquired over the
years and now try and pattern match
again yeah and I think the meta point
mark that you make about the learning
that Gophers so so many people it's the
learning from those experiences and I
think you know the ability particularly
in the early stages is we're trying to
assess product market fit as we're
trying to determine what mechanisms for
our go-to-market are going to be most
effective
I think being like brutally honest with
ourselves about what's working what
isn't working
and understanding the rationale behind
it it's not just the Google marketplace
but it was the elements that made that
successful in that case and it and I
think that's one of the things you and
your team have done just exceptionally
well yeah and I think also being being
willing to be willing to admit you're
wrong yeah like we were so excited on
that initial business model yeah and
then when we you know one of my one of
my favorite observations and sasses
there there are some companies who pride
themselves in in succeeding with only
engineers and marketing arms right and
say we don't even need salespeople Tom
let's you'll hear some companies say
that and I think what I've grown to
appreciate over time is that if your
customer has a preference to engage with
people then you as a provider need to
make the decision either we're going to
ignore them or we're gonna lean into
them yeah and there is tremendous
success when you look at those companies
who have a high desire they assign value
to you and they have a willingness to
grow with you in a certain way you
should not ignore that certain way yeah
and I think the blend and sass is yes
you want a self-directed high velocity
trial and by motion but if that can also
be be bolted with a high-touch model
that is efficient I think then you can
serve a lot of different companies yeah
and I find being responsive to what
you're hearing from the market and being
willing to adapt the model based on what
you're learning is really important so
so I know you talked about these
transformation moments inside
organizations and can you describe some
of those moments that you had in spark
seed and and the way you responded to
those and and whether you can create
them or they just you just have they
happen by themselves organically yeah I
think the I remember this was probably
five six years ago we when we did our
big round with insight out of New York
I remember them asking how many
customers we had that paid us over that
magical five thousand dollar motion and
the number was 37 uh-huh and I I
remember that moment because
it was such a lesson in recognizing that
a benchmark and an upper bound is meant
to be broken
yeah right so when I think about our
biggest customer I remember when our
high watermark was fifteen thousand
fifty thousand a hundred thousand two
hundred fifty thousand and that first
million-dollar customer looking back on
it now if you'd asked me two thousand
twelve mark do you think you'll have a
two million dollar plus customer
everything like maybe Tom but I don't
know how to put the odds on it yeah so
it's that it's that that recognition
that you can't get to ever get to high
centered or to wedded to what your
current performance is and you have to
stretch yourself so I think the
transformation moment sometimes were
hitting being able to break those
barriers that were perceived as almost
impenetrable earlier and now yeah we
still celebrate every win and every
expansion but now there's this
recognition of how do you get more of
those really big ones or more of those
high-impact customer scenarios yeah and
I think there is an exercise inside the
company that's important of resetting
the bar recalibrating it and because we
change our expectations of what success
looks like so so I know a lot of
companies in my talk earlier this
morning I actually talked a little bit
about this a lot of companies you know
we're always trying to find ways to
drive you know accountability in in the
company and there's you know a balance
it's about setting those aspirational
goals and yet having them be realistic
and and driving accountability against
those do you have a system I know some
companies use okay ours for example do
you have systems that you use to to to
motivate people and drive accountability
inside smartsheet yeah it's um yes I'll
speak to two things the first is how we
engage all of our new team members so
our senior team and I still engage every
single new employee yeah in a very small
setting yeah and we talk about the
difference between adjectives and verbs
or adjectives are the things you see on
coffee cups coffee mugs you know are you
driven are you decisive are you
supportive those are all great I think
we focused a lot more on the the verbs
so that's the motion you know do you
observe DUI dat research do you
recommend you actually
- you do you measure and and we really
instill that mindset so it wasn't until
we hit about a thousand employees that
we adopted more of an okay our
methodology so objects objectives and
key results and what we had done prior
to that was very goal and metric driven
right so was hey Tom you have to get
this number of companies in this
industry or this a or our threshold and
if you don't hit it you haven't hit your
metric maybe it'll affect your bonus
right and what we've what we've grown to
appreciate is that there is sometimes a
lot even if you don't hit that metric
there is a ton of value in your pursuit
of that metric yeah and we actually have
decoupled now success being solely
driven by whether you attain a metric ok
hours are difficult though they're very
difficult you know what my K R is maybe
your objective I so this don't expect if
you adopt this method first of all read
that book measure what matters but don't
expect this to be an overnight hey great
we'll just do ok hours and let's fire
them up it takes time but what I love
about those is this mindset of moving
from an annual target to a quarterly
target and the accountability range has
really been drawn in now where it's not
this oh yeah I'm making great progress
Tom and in October I'll tell you if we
hit it we brought that cycle time in
quite a bit yeah and that worked a where
we're now implementing okay ours so
we're going through our process we did
you know read John doors book
measurement what matters and there's a
lot of good insight in there and there
are a couple things I love about it and
you hit on this one is that the
objectives should be stretch goals they
should they should and he talks about
the science being if we set more
aspirational targets we'll achieve more
in apps in in aggregate so which is
which is really what it's about and I
like the idea of decoupling the key
results from the incentive system
because then we can be more
intellectually honest about what we've
accomplished what we haven't and and
this notion of modifying those on a
quarterly basis and the other the
transparency across the organization
letting everybody in the organization
see the okay
I I think that's very powerful so so
let's let's talk about culture and
accountability you know is an element of
culture so yo starting at the
broad-strokes how do you how do you
think about culture at smartsheet so one
of the one of the great questions you'll
hear at any o the new employee
orientation someone will ask the
question something like so mark how do
you make sure culture is maintained it
doesn't actually work that way there's
not like when when you walk through the
doors of smartsheet it's not it's not
like dropped on you yeah so I turned
that pretty quickly on them and asked
them what they're gonna contribute right
so it's a the cultural piece that has
changed pretty significantly and then in
the early days it's assumed right we
just know a Tom and I we've worked
together six years and then we can
finish each other sentences but when the
team grows to you know a couple hundred
even 75 from from 10 yeah some of those
things aren't fully known so one asked
one part of it is memorializing it like
do you write it down like what do we
believe in and it wasn't until we were
that at that thousand person mark where
we actually wrote down our purpose yeah
and I got to tell you this notion of
empowering everyone to improve how they
work like you can ask anybody in our
company right now what we do and they
believe that so when we have our engaged
conference for customers or we're
selling somebody it's about how do you
activate how do you help that person
achieve that unlock code so that that
cultural piece needs to be I think not
just values and sort of here our
principles and yours our operating model
but what is that thing that drives you
and that becomes I think ever important
as as you click up the the employee
count scale yeah and I think mark you
hit a really important part for our
colleagues in the audience that you know
I think you know early employees and
founders you have that culture you know
what you mean you know what the purpose
of the company is and it's you know it's
intuitive but it's not as intuitive as
people come into the company so that
process of writing it down and being
very intentional about culture about
purpose about vision I think is you know
I think we as leaders yes sometimes
underestimate the importance of that for
it for our team so that's that's great
learning and I mean it was there was a
wonderful moment at least for one of us
in the room a couple months ago when I
asked one of my senior senior leaders to
tell us what our purposes yeah and he
was mostly correct and it was
interesting because what he what he
gained for for missing a couple words
was the right to at the next big company
meeting actually giving a full
presentation on her purpose yeah so it's
you know it may seem trivial but getting
it actually perfectly right yeah and
institutionalized I think really sets a
good foundation you know one of the
things we did that was kind of fun yeah
we had you know the vision and purpose
and and it had an elevator pitch you
know that went with that and then we did
a little contest where the leadership
team would go around randomly and ask
some of our team members to give the
elevator pitch and you know we had some
rewards when they got it right but it
really it really was it was kind of fun
so so we've got we've got some time left
here let's talk about let's talk about
product innovation and product vision
and how do you align what you want to do
with your view of product market fit how
do you think about innovation how do you
balance that investments in product
versus say go to market investments
investments there's a leader how do you
think about those issues yeah the you
know really has gone through a number of
phases based on what the capital profile
of the company has been so when you go
public and you take on capital people
expect you to invest and maintain a high
rate of both organic and possibly even
in organic growth so we we have the good
fortune of being able to have a balanced
approach now so we have investments when
we think about distribution for the
first number of years the company was
all about us centricity yeah we had only
employees based in the US we had only
employees based in Bellevue Washington
yeah so we have a few hundred people now
it roughly embossed
we opened up London and Scotland
recently and and when we think about the
balance it's not just refining the model
in one Geo but then replicating that
right so you have investment on two
fronts improving what you have extending
that to new markets and being able to do
those simultaneously and I think the
part of the trick is how do you do that
while being aggressive enough while not
overextending right and then on the
product side I think there we obviously
have a point of view for where we want
to take the product in our key areas
whether it be automation reporting
empowering on technical people within a
business but the other inputs that we
look at is what do the big caps in the
market who have very very established
account control what are their agendas
right and how are you supporting their
agendas whether their names are
Microsoft or Google or Adobe or Amazon
so that's another key one and then I
would argue the most important is when
you have a very even if you have a few
customers what is your customer signal
and if they do not have a material input
into your into your product
prioritization mechanism I would
encourage you to change your mechanism
and I think when you're able to balance
those three first recognize you're not
always going to be right but I think
have representation across each of those
each of those inputs great that's that's
terrific
so you've been private company CEO
raised capital recruit team you know a
public company CEO and how do you think
about and I think there the data is over
ten thousand SAS companies funded maybe
a couple hundred you know get to your
size you know get to be public so how do
you think about the experiences you had
as a private company CEO and what most
prepared you to be a public company CEO
and what you know thoughts or advice
would you share for our colleagues who
aspire to maybe be a public company CEO
that they should focus on earlier in
their journey well when I got back from
New York a lot of friends and and
customers and partners that hey what's
it like it's not that different tough I
know it really isn't and
when I think about the the buy-side
analyst so buy-side analyst is an
analyst who represents and supports
portfolio managers who invest hundreds
of hundreds of millions billions there
are a couple which managed to over two
trillion dollars these people are
assessing your product and your strategy
but they care about the individual they
care about whether you're trustworthy
they care about whether your quote bacca
bowl and these are things that are
present as a private company operator or
public company operator and I think the
one key thing is I think in both fronts
you know don't don't succumb the
temptation of things that fly in the
face of the things that are right
because employees and customers sniff it
out pretty darn quickly and the second
you like hey now I am public it's it's
it's sort of off-putting right so the
more you can come across is approachable
to those people who are trying to learn
about your business whether it's a
customer and investor you know it's that
should not change much I would argue the
real challenge is how do you how do you
balance and allocate your time yeah
because there are now many more mouths
to feed if you will we used to have a
few private investors on our board now
we have many public investors so so
managing that is it's tricky but it can
be done all right
lightning round we've got we've got
about a minute and a half left so
lightning round future of Excel will be
subscribed to for many years to come
right most important thing as a private
company CEO and raising money evidence
and extreme confidence the most
important thing as a public company CEO
be able to develop a story arc that you
could execute against yeah
congratulations fantastic closing
thoughts for the audience's as we wrap
up I think it's um I would encourage
each to maintain a chip on your shoulder
I think you're gonna have you're gonna
be pressured and questioned and doubted
and I think even when things are going
swimmingly well recognize that you don't
have to look too far for evidence to be
there that you need to be doing
something better and I think that
continuous reminder that there's
something that you can improve
I think should never be lost so I define
that as a chip on the shoulder I like to
meet doubters and then prove them wrong
mark Bader you've done a fantastic job
and thank you for sharing your insights
what a fantastic story on my pleasure